Can you predict how much water will be on the Earth's surface next month?

Droughts, usually caused by long periods of low rainfall and temperature spikes, threaten global food security, local economies, and fragile ecosystems. Unlike rapid-onset disasters such as floods, droughts are "slow-moving" crises. Early detection is essential to reduce socio-economic impact, guide emergency responses, and support resilient planning for agriculture and infrastructure.

A common approach to monitor large-scale drought conditions is through satellite-based observations from NASA's GRACE mission, which provide estimates of Total Water Storage (TWS). TWS measures all water stored on and beneath the Earth's surface. This includes groundwater, soil moisture, surface water, and snow. GRACE-derived products are typically available with a delay of 2 - 3 months limiting their usefulness for near-real-time monitoring and making it difficult to assess the current state of the hydrological system.

In this challenge, your task is to develop an accurate model for short-term (one-month ahead) prediction of TWS at a global scale. t+1 refers to the next calendar month. In Train.csv, target(t) corresponds to TWS_t at calendar month t+1, where available. Because TWS_t is masked for 66.5% of test rows, the effective TWS forecast horizon ranges from 1 to 7 months, so the task is not strictly one-month ahead. For predictions at month t, only information available at or before t may be used; future observed values must not be used to fill or infer masked TWS values.

Successful solutions must demonstrate measurable improvements in predictive performance and robustness across space and time. Futhermore, top-performers will be required to describe how their approach addresses:

    data and model bias
    model transparency
    approach reusability
    sustainability and efficiency

The challenge includes predictor covariates derived from established Copernicus resources, including the European and Global Drought Observatories and the Copernicus Climate Data Store. These sources provide a transparent and reproducible basis for climate and drought-related variables used to support Total Water Storage prediction. Any additional use of external Copernicus data must comply with the stated prediction-time availability assumptions and must be fully documented to ensure reproducibility and avoid data leakage.

Participants may use relevant covariates from Copernicus resources, including the European and Global Drought Observatories and the Copernicus Climate Data Store, provided that these variables are available at the stated prediction time, do not directly or indirectly include future GRACE/TWS information, and are fully documented to ensure reproducibility and prevent data leakage.

About AI for Good - International Telecommunication Union (ITU)

AI for Good is organized by ITU in partnership with 40 UN Sister Agencies. The goal of AI for Good is to identify practical applications of AI to advance the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals and scale those solutions for global impact. It’s the leading action-oriented, global & inclusive United Nations platform on AI.

About the Global Initiative on Resilience to Natural Hazards through AI Solutions

The Global Initiative on Resilience to Natural Hazards through AI Solutions is a collaborative effort led by various UN agencies, including the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Universal Postal Union (UPU), and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). The initiative aims to explore how AI can be effectively used in disaster management, providing expert guidance and support for research, innovation, and the development of standards. Building on previous work, the initiative leverages the outcomes of the ITU/WMO/UNEP Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Natural Disaster Management (FG-AI4NDM). To support the implementation of standards, the Global Initiative has developed a series of educational and capacity strengthening activities including this landslide challenge.

About the European Commission Joint Research Centre

The Joint Research Center (JRC) is the European Commission’s science and knowledge service. Its mission is to provide independent, evidence-based scientific knowledge and technical expertise to support European Union policies and help them create a positive impact on society. JRC scientists carry out research across a wide range of fields including environment, climate and water resilience, energy solutions, digital transformation, security, health, food systems, and sustainable resources. They aim to help EU decision-makers develop reliable, effective, and forward-looking policies based on the best available evidence.

JRC leads the Copernicus Emergency Management Service and its European and global Drought Observatories.

About the King’s Institute for Artificial Intelligence - King’s College London

The King’s Institute for Artificial Intelligence brings together the best minds at King’s and beyond to accelerate the development of safe, secure and ethical AI that tackles major national and global challenges. Our pluralistic ‘AI+’ approach embraces diverse methods; prioritises strong data and AI governance; and addresses fairness, privacy and sustainability so that AI delivers trusted, positive impact. We equip researchers to do science better with AI and ensure more voices can shape technologies that influence economies, societies and public life worldwide. King's experts are developing AI solutions for the climate emergency, economic growth, and the transformation of public services—from health and social care to justice and education. Through strategic partnerships, convening and thought leadership, the Institute ensures King’s contributes to responsible innovation and the governance frameworks.

About UNCCD

The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) is a legally binding international agreement established to address desertification, land degradation, and the effects of drought. With 197 Parties, including 196 countries and the European Union, it provides a global framework for cooperation on sustainable land management. Its mission is to support countries in protecting and restoring land, promoting sustainable land management, and improving the resilience of vulnerable communities and ecosystems.The UNCCD works through international cooperation, partnerships, and national action programs to reduce land degradation, strengthen drought preparedness, and contribute to sustainable development. Its long term goals include achieving land degradation neutrality, improving the living conditions of affected populations, ensuring that land resources can continue to provide food, water, shelter, biodiversity, and economic opportunities for future generations.

About the European Space Agency (ESA)

The European Space Agency is Europe’s gateway to space. Its mission is to shape the development of Europe’s space capability and ensure that investment in space continues to deliver benefits to the citizens of Europe and the world. ESA is developing a family of Earth Observation missions delivering an unprecedented amount of data on the state of our planet and its changes, providing scientists with unique insight into how our planet operates as an Earth System, as well as global information supporting policy, decision making and enhancing the resilience of our society.

About the WMO

WMO is the United Nations system's authoritative voice on the state and behaviour of the Earth's atmosphere, its interaction with the land and oceans, the weather and climate it produces and the resulting distribution of water resources. As weather, climate and the water cycle know no national boundaries, international cooperation at a global scale is essential for the development of meteorology and operational hydrology as well as to reap the benefits from their application. WMO provides the framework for such international cooperation for its 193 Member States and Territories. WMO’s mandate relates to the areas of meteorology (weather and climate), operational hydrology and related geophysical sciences. WMO has a powerful role in contributing to the safety and welfare of humanity by fostering collaboration between its Members' National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHSs) and advancing the application of meteorology and hydrology in many societal and economic areas. WMO regulates and facilitates free and unrestricted exchange of data and information, products, and services in real- or near-real time. This is critical for applications relating to the safety and security of society, social and economic welfare, and the protection of the environment. WMO standards and policies contribute to policy formulation in these areas at national and regional levels. The Organization plays a leading role in international efforts to monitor and protect the climate and the environment. In collaboration with other UN agencies and NMHSs, WMO supports the implementation of UNFCCC and a number of environmental conventions and is instrumental in providing advice and assessments to governments on related matters. These activities contribute towards ensuring the sustainable development and well-being of nations.

About the ECMWF

ECMWF is the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts. It is both a research institute and a 24/7 operational service, producing global numerical weather predictions and other data for its Member and Co-operating States and the broader community.

ECMWF operates a world-class supercomputer facility for weather forecasting and holds one of the largest meteorological data archives. Other strategic activities include delivering advanced training and assisting the World Meteorological Organization in implementing its programmes. ECMWF is a key player in Copernicus, the Earth Observation component of the European Union’s Space programme, by implementing quality-assured information on climate change (Copernicus Climate Change Service), atmospheric composition (Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service), and contributing to information on flooding and fire danger (Copernicus Emergency Management Service). Together with ESA and EUMETSAT, ECMWF is delivering the EU's Destination Earth initiative, which is developing prototype digital twins of the Earth. The organisation is headquartered in Reading, UK, with additional sites in Bologna, Italy, and Bonn, Germany, and employs around 580 staff from more than 30 countries.

About the International Water Management Institute (IWMI)

The International Water Management Institute (IWMI) is a CGIAR Research Center working toward a water-secure world. Headquartered in Colombo, Sri Lanka, with offices in 17 countries and scientists active in more than 55, IWMI delivers research-for-development that turns evidence into practical solutions. For over three decades, we have partnered with governments, farmers, civil society, development agencies and businesses to improve water and land management for agriculture, ecosystems, climate resilience and inclusive growth. Our work combines science, digital innovation, policy engagement, capacity strengthening and scalable business models to reduce poverty and hunger, protect environments and build resilient food, land and water systems across the Global South.

About the Fraunhofer Heinrich-Hertz-Institut (HHI)

Fraunhofer Heinrich-Hertz-Institut (HHI) is a leading research institute in the fields of modern communication networks, multimedia systems, artificial intelligence, video technologies, photonics, and digital infrastructure. Its work focuses on developing innovative information and communication technologies, ranging from fundamental research to prototypes and industry-ready solutions. In close collaboration with partners from research and industry, Fraunhofer HHI contributes to the advancement of high-speed communication systems, optical and wireless networks, video and audio processing, immersive media, computer vision, and AI-based applications. The institute also plays an active role in the standardization of information and communication technologies and aims to support the development of a sustainable, secure, and inclusive digital society by addressing the growing demand for reliable broadband capacity and advanced multimedia services.
Evaluation

There is a two-phase evaluation process for this challenge; the first phase is based on your leaderboard score, followed by a rubric evaluation for the top 10 on the leaderboard.
Phase One: Leaderboard Evaluation

The challenge uses Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) for the leaderboard ranking. This phase will counts for 50% of your final score.
Phase Two Evaluation

When the challenge ends, your report will be evaluated for AI Trustworthiness, Innovation, and practicality.

    AI Trustworthiness (30%): scored on adherence to ethical guidelines outlined in the "Trustworthiness Evaluation" document, emphasising transparency, and bias mitigation (Trustworthiness Evaluation.docx)
    Innovation and practicality (20%): recognition of creative and practical approaches that demonstrate adaptability and robustness for real-word application.

Your submission file must contain exactly 2 columns: ID and Target, where Target is the predicted TWS. The order of the rows does not matter, but you must include predictions for all entries in the test file. Your submission file should look like this:

ID                      Target
20150901_-55.4_-68.5    0.082
20150901_-55.4_-67.5    0.182